Edited text for clarity (tech writer) (#149)
canonical/ubuntu-server-documentation: explanation/intro-to/high-availability.md

## High Availability cluster quorum

> HA clusters often also use [quorum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quorum_(distributed_computing)) witness storage (local or cloud) to avoid this scenario. A witness device cannot be shared between two halves of a split cluster, so in the event that all cluster members cannot communicate with each other (e.g., failed heartbeat), if a member cannot access the witness, it cannot become active.

### Example of HA cluster quorum

![2-node HA cluster|578x674,75%](https://assets.ubuntu.com/v1/14896401-HA_intro.png)

## Fencing

> Fencing protects your data from being corrupted and prevents your application from becoming unavailable due to unintended concurrent access by rogue nodes. If a node is unresponsive doesn’t mean it has stopped accessing your data. The only way to be absolutely sure that your data is safe is to employ fencing, which establishes that the unresponsive node is completely offline before the data is accessed by another node.

Reviewer: For the second part, I think we can clarify it a bit further with even simpler language. What do you think about:
"Fencing protects your data from being corrupted, and prevents your application from becoming unavailable, due to unintended concurrent access by rogue nodes. If a node is unresponsive, it doesn’t mean it has stopped accessing your data. The only way to be absolutely sure your data is safe is to use fencing, which ensures that the unresponsive node is truly offline before the data can be accessed by another node."

> Also, if a clustered service cannot be stopped, a cluster can use fencing to force the whole node offline and making it safe to start the service elsewhere. The most popular example of fencing is cutting a host’s power.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases where a clustered service cannot be stopped, a cluster can use fencing to force the whole node offline, making it safe to start the service elsewhere. The most popular example of fencing is cutting a host’s power.
```

### Key benefits of fencing

- An active counter-measure taken by a functioning host to isolate a misbehaving (usually dead) host from shared data.

> - A mechanism that is the **most critical** part of a cluster utilising SAN or other shared storage technology (*Ubuntu HA Clusters can only be supported if the fencing mechanism is configured*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fencing is the **most critical** part of a cluster using SAN or other shared storage technology (*Ubuntu HA Clusters can only be supported if the fencing mechanism is configured*).
```

Reviewer: SAN doesn't seem to be defined anywhere on this page but is used a few times. This seems to be the first instance of it. Let's expand the acronym here to:
"Storage Area Network (SAN)" so that we can justifiably use the acronym elsewhere.

Author: Fixed

- Required by OCFS2, GFS2, cLVMd (before Ubuntu 20.04), lvmlockd (from 20.04 and beyond).

## Linux High Availability projects

> This section will only describe the most important upstream high availability related projects that are included in Ubuntu Linux. There are many other HA projects that are available to Ubuntu.

Reviewer: This line is a bit longer now, but it's not really clearer. Could we revert this change?

> Theses key HA packages are present in the latest Ubuntu LTS release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following packages are present in the latest Ubuntu LTS release:
```

> ### Ubuntu HA core packages

Reviewer: With the advent of Ubuntu Core, I've been trying to change all instances of "core" to something else (unless they refer specifically to Ubuntu Core) to avoid confusion. I'm not quite sure what the best equivalent would be here. Maybe "main packages" or something like that?

Author: I went with "Main Ubuntu HA packages."

- **gfs2-utils** - Global File System 2 - filesystem tools. The Global File System allows a cluster of machines to concurrently access shared storage hardware like SANs or iSCSI and network block devices.

> - **Keepalived** - Provides simple and robust facilities for load balancing and high-availability to Linux system and Linux based infrastructures. The load balancing framework relies on well-known and widely used [Linux Virtual Server (IPVS)](http://www.linux-vs.org/) kernel module which provides Layer4 loadbalancing. It implements a set of checkers to dynamically and adaptively maintain and manage a load balanced server pool according to their health, while high-availability is achieved by the [VRRP](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/vrrp/documents/) protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Keepalived** - Provides simple and robust facilities for load balancing and high availability to Linux systems and Linux-based infrastructures. The load balancing framework relies on the well-known and widely used [Linux Virtual Server (IPVS)](http://www.linux-vs.org/) kernel module which provides Layer4 load balancing. It implements a set of checkers to dynamically and adaptively maintain and manage a load-balanced server pool according to their health, while high availability is achieved by the [VRRP](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/vrrp/documents/) protocol.
```

### Ubuntu HA community packages

> The HA packages in this list are supported just like any other package available in the **[universe] repository**  would be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The HA packages in this list are supported just like any other package available in the **[universe] repository**.
```

Reviewer: (for symmetry :) )

| tgt OR targetcli-fb* | [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/tgt) \| [Upstream](https://github.com/fujita/tgt)
| lvm2 | [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/lvm2) \| [Upstream](https://sourceware.org/lvm2/)

> **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario

Author: No problem. I will make the change.

> **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario

Reviewer: I think it's more of an indentation issue - to get the sub-paragraphs to appear as part of the same bullet point, they need to be indented to at least the same level as the text in the bullet point (i.e., with two spaces). It's still rendering the same, so I'll have a play around and see if I can fix it :)

> + **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario
> 
> **CLVM** - supported before **Ubuntu 20.04**
> 
> A distributed lock manager (DLM) is used to broker concurrent LVM metadata accesses. Whenever a cluster node needs to modify the LVM metadata, it must secure permission from its local  `clvmd` , which is in constant contact with other  `clvmd`  daemons in the cluster and can communicate a need to lock a particular set of objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario

  **CLVM** - supported before **Ubuntu 20.04**

  A distributed lock manager (DLM) is used to broker concurrent LVM metadata accesses. Whenever a cluster node needs to modify the LVM metadata, it must secure permission from its local  `clvmd` , which is in constant contact with other  `clvmd`  daemons in the cluster and can communicate a need to lock a particular set of objects.
```

> <br>**[lvmlockd](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/man8/lvmlockd.8.html)** - supported after **Ubuntu 20.04**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **[lvmlockd](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/man8/lvmlockd.8.html)** - supported after **Ubuntu 20.04**
```

> * **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario
>   **CLVM** - supported before **Ubuntu 20.04**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario

  **CLVM** - supported before **Ubuntu 20.04**
```

> As of 2017, a stable LVM component that is designed to replace  `clvmd` by making the locking of LVM objects transparent to the rest of LVM, without relying on a distributed lock manager.<BR>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  As of 2017, a stable LVM component that is designed to replace  `clvmd` by making the locking of LVM objects transparent to the rest of LVM, without relying on a distributed lock manager.
```

> The lvmlockd benefits over clvm are:<BR><BR>
>   - lvmlockd supports two cluster locking plugins: DLM and SANLOCK. SANLOCK plugin can supports up to ~2000 nodes that benefits LVM usage in big virtualization / storage cluster, while DLM plugin fits HA cluster.
>   - lvmlockd has better design than clvmd. clvmd is command-line level based locking system, which means the whole LVM software will get hang if any LVM command gets dead-locking issue.
>   - lvmlockd can work with lvmetad.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The lvmlockd benefits over clvm are:

  * lvmlockd supports two cluster locking plugins: DLM and SANLOCK. SANLOCK plugin can supports up to ~2000 nodes that benefits LVM usage in big virtualization / storage cluster, while DLM plugin fits HA cluster.
  * lvmlockd has better design than clvmd. clvmd is command-line level based locking system, which means the whole LVM software will get hang if any LVM command gets dead-locking issue.
  * lvmlockd can work with lvmetad.
```

| tgt OR targetcli-fb* | [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/tgt) \| [Upstream](https://github.com/fujita/tgt)
| lvm2 | [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/lvm2) \| [Upstream](https://sourceware.org/lvm2/)

* **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

| tgt OR targetcli-fb* | [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/tgt) \| [Upstream](https://github.com/fujita/tgt)
| lvm2 | [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/lvm2) \| [Upstream](https://sourceware.org/lvm2/)

> * **LVM2** in a Shared-Storage Cluster Scenario:*

Reviewer: I'm not sure why the trailing star was added?

Author: Fixed.

> <BR>**CLVM** - supported before **Ubuntu 20.04**

Reviewer: Sphinx hasn't respected the new line, so we will probably need an empty line after this. The rendered docs have made all of this content into a single block.

I'd suggest getting rid of the html code `<br>` and just replacing it with proper spacing and line breaking :) it'll make the markdown more readable to do it that way.

> A distributed lock manager (DLM) is used to broker concurrent LVM metadata accesses. Whenever a cluster node needs to modify the LVM metadata, it must secure permission from its local  `clvmd` , which is in constant contact with other  `clvmd`  daemons in the cluster and can communicate a need to obtain a lock on a particular set of objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A distributed lock manager (DLM) is used to broker concurrent LVM metadata accesses. Whenever a cluster node needs to modify the LVM metadata, it must secure permission from its local  `clvmd` , which is in constant contact with other  `clvmd`  daemons in the cluster and can communicate a need to lock a particular set of objects.
```

Reviewer: "get" is plainer than "obtain", but removing both is plainer still :D

> Note: `targetcli-fb (Linux LIO)` will likely replace `tgt` in future Ubuntu versions.

## Upstream documentation

> The server guide cannot document every existing option for all the HA related software described in this page. It is only designed to document recommended scenarios for Ubuntu HA Clusters. More complete documentation can be found upstream at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Server documentation is not intended to document every option for all the HA related software described in this page. More complete documentation can be found upstream at:
```

- Other
  - [Ubuntu Bionic HA in Shared Disk Environments (Azure)](https://discourse.ubuntu.com/t/ubuntu-high-availability-corosync-pacemaker-shared-disk-environments/14874)

> > A very special thanks and all the credit to [ClusterLabs Project](https://clusterlabs.org/) for the detailed documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> A very special thanks and all the credit to [ClusterLabs Project](https://clusterlabs.org/) for their detailed documentation.
```
